[THEME MUSIC]
>> We have to know where we
come from if we're going to have
a clear idea of
where we're going.
If we have illusions and false
ideas about who and what we are
and how we got here,
then that illusory state
is just going to
continue into the future.
We need to understand the
forces that were involved
in shaping the modern world
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Ancient Sumeria.
According to
mainstream scholars,
this is the birthplace
of civilization
as we know it, the
birthplace of religion,
the first science, the first
war, and the first written
word.
Now, all that is
left is a message
buried beneath the sand.
>> It's one of Iraq's most
famous archaeological sites
rising from the desert near
Nasiriyah in the southeast,
the Ziggurat of Ur, a massive
4,000-year-old temple pyramid
and the surrounding ruins
of an ancient Sumerian city.
>> Archaeologists and scholars
have been piecing evidence
together for centuries in
this area of the world,
hoping to prove the biblical
stories of the Garden of Eden.
>> Most people think, well,
we're gifted in the Middle East
because of the oil.
And there's a lot
of truth to that.
But at the same
time, you're going
to find people who are very
interested in these different
esoteric philosophies like
the Freemasons in government,
the Christians in government.
All of these people have
long had a strong interest
and also believe that there
may be some kind of power
or some sort of connection
there, that if you make it,
it empowers you in some way.
>> What kind of power could
these groups have if they could
prove how humanity started?
The search for
something more powerful
than our own current reality
isn't a modern concept,
but rather an ongoing
search for the location
of the Garden of Eden,
the proverbial beginning.
>> There's been a fixation
amongst biblical scholars,
early archaeologists, that
everything in the Middle East
began on the Euphrates and the
Tigris down in, what is today,
lower Iraq.
And that is where the
Garden of Eden was,
this was where everything
emerged, good and bad,
in the sort of
Genesis tradition.
>> In 1922, English
archaeologist C Leonard Woolley
went to Southern Iraq to
hopefully find the Garden
of Eden based on early
discoveries of Sumerian
Cuneiforms.
However, what he actually
uncovered instead
was the exact location of the
ancient Sumerian city of Ur.
Was he getting close?
>> The early archaeologists
were trying to prove the Bible
and they were funded
by biblical societies.
And that's, you
know, in other words,
they had to come
up with the proof.
And it ignored a lot of
legends and traditions
which suggested that these
cities were elsewhere.
>> Could Woolley have ignored
some important information that
was revealed several
years before?
In 1849, almost
75 years earlier,
thousands of Sumerian Cuneiforms
were found northwest of Ur,
at the ancient cities
of Sippar and Nippur.
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
In 1849, Henry Layard
performed many excavations
on the Sippar site
and discovered
about 20,000 tablets--
Sumerian and Akkadian.
And amongst all the tablets
discovered, about a dozen
of them or about
the Garden of Eden.
>> Could this be the location
of the Garden of Eden?
Or was this just another
clue leading researchers
to another location?
>> Subsequent cultures,
whether the Assyrians,
whether the Babylonians, who
rose to prominence in that
area, who were not Sumerians,
nevertheless venerated
and highly valued everything
that the Sumerians did.
And that's why we can
read the Sumerian language
because those
later cultures made
a project of taking
Sumerian texts
and translating them
into their language.
And those are languages
that the scholars could
read because they were
Semitic languages,
they belong to a
language family where
the code could be cracked.
Whereas Sumerian was an isolate,
and without those translations
done by later cultures who
nevertheless had contact
with Sumer, we would not be
able to read those Sumerian
texts at all.
>> Were these later cultures
able to decipher the beginning
of humanity?
Sumero-Akkadian
researcher and author
of eight books regarding
Sumerian translation, Anton
Parks, believes that
for hundreds of years,
we have been translating
these tablets wrong.
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
Gerry Zeitlin, who
was a scientist who
worked on the SETI
project for many years
and collaborated with NASA,
he was very interested
in the Sumerian translations
and he provided me
with these 10 tablets found
at Sippar to check symbols one
by one.
I noticed one translation
saying one thing and the other
saying sometimes the
complete opposite.
The true translations
did not comply.
I persistently did
research on Hebrew
but nothing was
coming out of it.
And then completely
by chance, I came
across a
Sumero-Akkadian lexicon,
and this is when I could
finally slowly start
to translate the tablets.
>> What Anton Parks began to
translate was a completely
different version of the
Garden of Eden than we've heard
before.
Not only had the words
been mistranslated,
the actual location
had been overlooked.
>> In biblical texts, we
constantly read about this idea
of heaven or paradise.
This comes from the
Greek paradeisos,
and this literally means
enclosure for wild animals.
Not paradise, a term that was
later transcribed as garden
during the Hellenistic era.
If we go back to the original
translation in the Sumerian
tablets, it says, the
men who serve the gods
work for them in the garden
and are treated like animals.
It is a very clear
and recurrent theme.
They are slaves who served
the divine community.
In Hebraic texts, we
understand that the humans
seem happy in this
so-called paradise which
is, in fact, more like
a concentration camp,
according to Sumerian texts.
In my translations, we also
discovered the word kharsag,
which translated to
city of the gods.
It's interesting that all
the highest points in Turkey
are named Karadag, which
strangely resembles Kharsag.
>> Karadag translates
to black mountain,
and also refers to the
highest mountains in Turkey.
The only summit with
the name Karadag
that is close to the
Mesopotamian plain
and tributary of the Tigris
and only a few kilometers
from the Euphrates,
stands 29 kilometers south
of the City Sirte
and 19 kilometers
southwest of the city of Ur.
Is this the paradise described
in the Sumerian text?
>> Gerry sent me images of
this site from Google Earth.
And at the back, on
the mountainside,
there is a little plain.
This is where I think the
Garden of Eden of the gods
was located based on my
translation of the text.
>> The Garden of Eden was where
the four rivers emerged from,
two of which are easily
identified as the Euphrates
and the Tigris, which do Indeed
obviously flow through modern
Iraq and empty out
into the Arabian Sea,
but they rise in
Southeast Turkey.
And the other two
rivers can be identified
as rivers that also rise in
Southeast to Eastern Turkey.
All of these rivers emerge
in the same general parts
of the world, which we know
today as either Eastern
or Southeastern Turkey.
>> With the decoding of
the Sumerian Cuneiforms
and the location of
these four rivers,
could this be the actual
location for the Garden
of Eden?
The closest paved road
to the proposed location
is Highway 5651.
As easy as it may seem to get
to this location to excavate,
scholars and
archaeologists consider
this area highly
politically unstable,
and it has remained untouched.
All we have at the
moment is the language
to decode from the Sumerian
Cuneiforms, the Cuneiforms that
describe a different
kind of paradise.
These 10 tablets,
according to Anton Parks,
tell the Sumerian version of how
the Garden of Eden was created.
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
From my translations,
I discovered
when the Sumerian
gods arrived on Earth,
they settled on this mountain
in order to create a colony
and be able to survive.
Apparently, they suffered
damage and ended up
on this mountain because of a
war, and they found shelter.
Many experts believe that they
came from the Pleiades star
cluster.
My opinion is that
they came from there.
Maybe the war broke
out around there.
But I really
believe that this is
where the Annunas were created.
During this conflict,
on one side,
you have a matriarchal
regime, and on the other side,
a patriarchal one with
all these new gods.
There are conflicts in
space, those new landscapes.
Like it says on the
genealogy of the land tablet,
these gods are going
to change the way
life gets implanted on Earth.
The gods are going to create
new conditions for life
to bloom for their
colony to thrive.
>> But who are these gods that
hope to make Earth their home?
>> The Epic of
Atrahasis and others,
they talk about that the Earth
was actually administered
by a conference of gods or a
group of gods in an assembly.
It wasn't just one god.
Yeah, they would have
like their equivalent
of the prime minister
or the CEO who would
be in charge of this group--
Enlil, Enki, there were
the primary members
of this congress there.
>> Well, Enki end Enlil
in the Sumerian system are
an interesting pair.
Enlil is this rather sort
of overarching, domineering,
angry, dangerous entity.
And he doesn't really
care about humanity.
Humanity are not very
important to him.
But then we have Enki, the
trickster and the other god
of wisdom, actually.
And he does care
about humanity and he
intervenes on the human level.
>> They are called gods but
they were humanoid beings
of a rather reptilian type.
The texts of Eden
that I translated
depict clearly and
quite frequently
the reptilian
features of the gods.
I personally estimate
that the gods
arrived approximately
300,000 years ago.
And this derives from the
fact that Homo sapiens
arrived shortly after.
I say this because
throughout the texts,
genetics and the transformation
of the human being
are recurrent themes.
The two particles that
compose the word Eden
are E, which means home, and
den or ten which is life.
But Indeed, they are not alone.
Humans are already on Earth.
Who are these human beings?
>> If the Sumerian gods realized
that they were not alone,
what might have been their
interaction with these kinds
of humans?
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
What can be noted in
the Sumerian tablets
when they clearly speak
of creating workers
to serve the Annunas, the main
geneticists is always Enki.
He works with the genome
that is on the planet
to create a new kind of human.
He is usually helped
by priestesses
that we often call
the Nintis, who
are the priestesses of life.
They know how to clone with him.
He can change the
human genomes according
to what Enlil asks
of him, which would
be left-brained,
well-disciplined humans.
>> When we look at the
Sumerian tradition,
it is a group of beings rather
than one being that creates
humankind.
So it is not a single
creator but a group
of intelligent,
technologically-advanced
beings.
And where the Sumerian
creation varies
from the Christian traditions,
for example, and some
of the native traditions, is
in the Sumerian traditions,
humankind began
with the sacrifice
of the life of an advanced
being, of a god from Sumeria
so that that god's DNA or the
blood, as what the texts say,
could be mixed with the
elements of the Earth to create
the first viable human.
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> These are the people who
have the knowledge to clone.
They can clone themselves
and then humans.
[NON-ENGLISH]
>> In the texts, it says,
they take the genes from
their opponents who
they consider inferior,
who they name as Kingu.
They use their blood
and they will go on
to create the new
human who is going
to serve them with these genes.
>> Researchers like Gregg Braden
stumbled across some research
that has connected the Sumerian
translations to an actual
genetic change in
our chromosomes.
>> Shedding new light on
these creation stories is with
the mystery of human
Chromosome Number 2.
Human Chromosome Number 2 is
the largest, second largest
chromosome in the human body.
It forms about 8% of
DNA in every cell.
And what makes it
such a mystery is
that it appears to be the
result of an ancient fusion
of pre-existing
chromosomes from primates
that have been fused
in a very precise way,
and the fusion site has
been modified and stabilized
so that human Chromosome Number
2 is optimized for us today.
This has happened in a way
that cannot be explained
by evolution as
we know it today.
And why is this important?
Human Chromosome
Number 2 contains
the genes that
largely set us apart
from all other forms of life.
The cortex of the human brain
that gives us the ability
for things like logic,
empathy, sympathy, compassion,
the ability to consciously
trigger conscious states
of self-healing
within our bodies--
these are possible because
of what has happened
with human Chromosome Number 2.
>> Could Chromosome Number
2 be the work of a master
geneticist, otherwise known as
Enki from the Sumerian text?
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> It is said that Enki secretly
modifies the human genes
by group or by location and
infused some humans with
the knowledge that is different
to the point where the other
gods turned against him.
His experiment will
change the human genes
to enlighten mankind.
And throughout this
cloning process,
that the Annunas and
Enlil are overlooking,
I think that some humans
filter through all of this
and start becoming independent.
>> Anton Parks points out that
this is something that the gods
did not expect from these new
humans that keeps appearing
in the ancient text.
And that is the human ability
to be more than just slaves.
This forms a division of
the gods, a division that
causes a war, a war that has
set the tone for humanity today.
>> There are very interesting
parallels with the story
of the Sumerian origin of
modern humanity and what we see
in modern dialogues about AI.
>> Humans fancy that there's
something special about the way
we perceive the world, and
yet we live in loops as tight
and as close as the hosts do,
seldom questioning our choices,
content, for the most part,
to be told what to do next.
>> We now have the rebooted
westworld in which something
that originated as the idea of a
robotic consciousness turns out
to be essentially a
flesh and blood creation,
which is then infused
with a consciousness.
Thus, asking the question,
if they can reproduce,
if they are self-aware, is this
not the next level of humanity?
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> An interesting and very
important name in the biblical
text and the Sumerian text is
the word Adam from the Garden
of Eden.
Extensive tests
have been conducted
to see where this
word came from.
Consistently looking
for Hebrew roots,
but it is a Sumerian
word which means animals.
Again, we understand that
human beings were considered
to be animals by
the Sumerian gods,
and this is where lies the
conflict between two gods--
Enki and Enlil.
Enki wants to treat them
like the other gods.
>> These two Sumerian gods
have a conflict over the use
of humans, and it is to be
the root of the biblical story
of the serpent in the garden.
As the story
unravels, the riddle
starts with the origin of the
word Satam or Satan in English.
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
Satam in Sumerian means
the administrator.
For years, everybody
has been looking
to find where this
word came from.
Books have revolved
around this issue.
It is a Sumerian term.
I don't understand
how nobody saw it.
It is very clear.
We find it in ancient lexicons.
Enlil is often referred
to as the Great Satam,
the master administrator.
In the Sumerian texts,
Enlil systematically
asked Enki to go negotiate
and talk with humans.
He is always the one
to deal with them.
Remember, he is a humanoid
with reptilian features.
And in Sumerian tablets,
he has always or very often
called the serpent,
just like in the Bible.
He's the only one that the
humans are going to see.
And when they see him, they
see a serpent-like humanoid.
I reckon this is
why he is called
the serpent in the garden.
He is a friend of the humans.
>> In the biblical text,
the serpent tempts Eve with
an apple from the forbidden
tree of knowledge.
Yahweh or God from the
Bible forbids the humans
in the garden to
partake from this tree.
According to Parks, the
Sumerian version of this story
translates Yahweh
or the biblical god
into the great satam, which
according to Sumerian text,
is Enlil, and the serpent
in the garden as Enki
who has become a
friend of the humans.
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> It is interesting to wonder
why the serpent in Sumerian
text, just like in the
Bible, comes to the woman.
I think there are two reasons.
The first one is that
I think the woman was
more accessible and available
when she was in the garden.
Therefore, he was more
often around women
who were collecting
food for the colony.
The second reason is
that I think women
are the future of mankind.
They raise their children,
they transmit their knowledge
to their children.
Enki is going to tell the women
the secret of tool-making.
This is expressed as gneesh
in Sumerian, which means tree.
This means for the
first time, mankind
could have two
sides of the tool.
The side that's
fundamentally good
so that they can take care of
themselves, and the tool that
is fundamentally bad which they
could use to defend themselves.
One could wonder why
Enki insist on getting
this particular secret
through to the humans.
Well, he has the desire
to set them free.
>> If indeed the knowledge that
Enki portrays to the humans is
a tool, is this an actual
ancient weapon that some
believe certain organizations
are looking for?
Or is this Enki teaching the
humans about the infinite
abilities they possess
through their DNA?
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> There is a spectacular
scene where humans take up arms
and go up the mountain
of the gods to revolt,
and even maybe try
to kill all the gods.
What happens is an abomination.
They put back on track
the few survivors.
Indeed, from what we can
grasp from his personality,
Enki was all about peace
and wouldn't use tools
in order to kill,
as he was perfectly
aware of what would happen.
So this scene of humans
rebelling against the gods is
quite special and it cannot be
found anywhere in the Bible.
Each time I see the first movie
of the Planet of the Apes,
it makes me think of this story.
Let's put this
back into context.
Replace the apes
with reptilian gods
and you have the
exact same story.
It is the exact same story.
It stayed somewhere
in our brain and this
is why we can find similar
elements in movies.
We can find similarities
as well in human behavior.
>> Could this situation be
the biblical fall of man?
Some scholars, like
Graham Hancock,
believe that freewill to
decide was the real purpose
of Enki's intervention.
>> We are here at this plane,
at this level of existence,
to learn the lessons of duality,
to make choices between good
and evil.
And it's very clear in the
ancient Egyptian system
that those choices
were important
and that they would define
us ultimately and set out
the route map for our
immortal destiny in a way.
I would say that
in Enki and Enlil,
we are looking at
the dualistic pair.
And what's interesting
about that dualism
is its intense focus on
the future of humanity
and what happens to us.
That matters to Enki, it
doesn't matter to Enlil.
Sumerian problem
is that we don't
know where the Sumerians
came from or who they were,
their language.
I mean, we have endless Sumerian
artifacts and endless Sumerian
tablets, but their
language is actually not
related structurally to any
other known language family.
It's completely
isolated and unique.
>> But could the Sumerian
problem have been a way
for Yahweh to install his own
rules so the humans would not
revolt again?
Is this why we don't find
any of these translations
anywhere else, and why
we have the establishment
and religious beliefs
surrounding our existence
today?
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> The Book of Genesis was
really written between 200
and 300 BC.
It is important to know
that the Bible where
we find the most
complete Book of Genesis
is dated from 400 AC, which
brings us to this idea,
that when scholars are
compiling the Book of Genesis,
they must have made a
choice, a deliberate choice
to keep or take out
some elements in order
to make the Bible
as we know it today.
>> Is it possible that modern
day religion and government
structure have been
mistranslating our human past
to keep us under the
control of Enlil or Yahweh?
Experts like Billy
Carson still believe
that the knowledge
from these gods
were able to further our
human imprint on this planet.
>> When you look into the
ancient Sumerian tablets,
they talk about these gods
that came here to Earth
and basically rose them to a
higher level of civilization
and taught them
everything that they know.
Now, these gods didn't
do the labor themselves
but they impart this
wisdom and information
onto the humans that
actually did the labor.
>> Could these gods have
created us in their likeness?
Was the Garden of
Eden the beginning
for not only the gods' reign
on Earth but also humans?
And could the constant
search for the Garden of Eden
be a programmed loop
we hope to understand?
>> The symbolism is very
important in our sense
of ourselves collectively
and personally.
There is something lost.
We don't know quite what
it is, but the story
suggests it's a lost connection
with the transcendence.
And so we wish we could go back,
not only to the Garden of Eden,
but in other ways go back
to some earlier time.
Nothing is more
significant in the received
wisdom than the story
of the Garden of Eden.
>> Graham Hancock believes that
not all is lost when you look
to other ancient texts
that tell a similar story.
>> What's dynamite in the
Gnostic system is that
the Gnostics believe that
we have been hoodwinked,
that that entity that we
have been taught to call god
and worship is no such thing.
>> Up next, we unearth the Nag
Hammadi and the Gnostic version
of the Garden of Eden.
[THEME MUSIC]